.. role:: raw-latex(raw)
   :format: latex
..

=========================
Installation Instructions
=========================

You can bypass the installation steps below by using Windows or Mac OS
Installer of OpenCRAVAT.

**Windows users**: `Windows
installer <http://karchinlab.org/opencravat/installers/open-cravat-2.2.6.exe>`__

Windows Defender may indicate that it prevented an unknown application
from running. If so, click the 'More' link on the message and then
select 'Run Anyway'. An "OpenCRAVAT" icon will be created on the Desktop
and the Start Menu. Double-click the OpenCRAVAT icon to launch the web
interface.

**Mac users**: `Mac installer <http://karchinlab.org/opencravat/installers/OpenCRAVAT.2.2.6.pkg>`__

Right-click the downloaded file and select "Open". Your Mac may ask you
to confirm stating that the file was not downloaded from the App Store.
Click "Open" button. Just double-clicking the installer may not enable
this "Open" option.

Installing with pip
-------------------

To install Open-CRAVAT you need Python 3.6 or newer. If you do not have
Python 3, install it using an installation file provided by
`python.org <http://www.python.org>`__.

Linux
~~~~~

On linux, OpenCRAVAT is installed with the
`'open-cravat' <https://pypi.org/project/open-cravat/>`__ pip package.
The steps for installation are different if you are installing for a
single user, or all users system.

For a single user, we recommend the following methods.

1) Use a virtual environment such as
   `venv <https://packaging.python.org/tutorials/installing-packages/#creating-virtual-environments>`__,
   or
   `conda <https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/install/index.html>`__.

2) Install to your home directory with
   ``pip3 install --user open-cravat``

To install for all users, run pip as root with
``sudo pip3 install open-cravat``. Pip will place the ``oc`` executable
at a location accessible to all users, probably ``/usr/local/bin``. All
users will be able to use ``oc`` to run jobs. However, only root will be
able to install modules, or launch the gui. Unfortunately, in many
systems ``/usr/local/bin`` is not in root's path. This can be solved by
linking ``oc`` to a directory in root's path, such as
``sudo ln -s /usr/local/bin/oc /usr/bin/oc``.

Mac
~~~

We recommend installing Python 3 using the installation file provided at
`python.org <http://www.python.org>`__ instead of using any other manual
way of installing Python 3. After installing Python 3, a new terminal
should be opened and used in executing the below commands.

Windows
~~~~~~~

To install the openCRAVAT python package, run the following command in a
command line shell.

``pip3 install open-cravat``

If you use Windows and if your Python 3 is installed inside of a
system-level folder such as "C::raw-latex:`\Program `Files", you may
have a problem with running open-cravat without the admin privilege. In
this case, we recommend installing Python 3 outside of system-level
folders and then installing open-cravat.

**PyYAML error:** If you experience an error such as
``ERROR: Cannot uninstall 'PyYAML'. It is a distutils installed project and thus we cannot accurately determine which files belong to it which would lead to only a partial uninstall.``,
use a virtual environment or try
``pip install --ignore-installed PyYAML``.

**For Ubuntu:** pip3 provided by apt does not install executables
properly. We recommend the following steps before proceeding.
``sudo apt remove python-pip`` if pip3 has already been installed with
apt. Then ``wget https://bootstrap.pypa.io/get-pip.py`` and
``sudo python3 get-pip.py``. For system-wide use of OpenCRAVAT, the
following suggestion works: Install OpenCRAVAT with ``sudo``
(``sudo pip3 install open-cravat``), Use ``sudo`` for
``oc module install/uninstall/update`` and ``oc gui``. Use without
``sudo`` for ``oc run`` and ``oc gui job.sqlite`` commands.

Install Base Components
-----------------------

OpenCRAVAT needs a set of base modules to function (converters, a
mapper, an aggregator and reporters). The mapper has a full GRCh38 gene
set database so will require 2GB of space to install.

``oc module install-base``

Running the web interface
-------------------------

Once the base install is complete, the OpenCRAVAT browser based GUI
interface can be used to install annotators, submit, and view jobs. This
can be done by following the instructions in the `GUI usage
page <https://github.com/KarchinLab/open-cravat/wiki/5.-GUI-usage>`__.

Alternatively, users who prefer a command line interface should proceed
by reading the following sections.

Install Annotators
------------------

OpenCRAVAT is a modular system that enables users to install and run
just those variant analysis modules that are relevant to their study.
The OpenCRAVAT Store includes a wide variety of variant interpretation
modules developed by both CRAVAT team members and by other members of
the variant interpretation community. For example the **grasp**
annotator provides GWAS associations for variants and **vest** provides
scores that predicts pathogenicity. Annotators for both coding and
non-coding variants are available.

To search the CRAVAT Store to see available annotators run:

``oc module ls -a -t annotator``

The result of this command is a list of available annotators that also
indicates which annotators you have installed.

+-------------+-------------+------------------+-------------+---------------------+--------------+
| Name        | Type        | Latest version   | Installed   | Installed version   | Up-to-date   |
+=============+=============+==================+=============+=====================+==============+
| cgc         | anotator    | 1.0.0            | False       |                     |              |
+-------------+-------------+------------------+-------------+---------------------+--------------+
| chasmplus   | anotator    | 1.0.0            | False       |                     |              |
+-------------+-------------+------------------+-------------+---------------------+--------------+
| clinvar     | anotator    | 1.0.0            | False       |                     |              |
+-------------+-------------+------------------+-------------+---------------------+--------------+
| cosmic      | anotator    | 1.0.0            | True        | 1.0.0               | True         |
+-------------+-------------+------------------+-------------+---------------------+--------------+
| **. . .**   | **. . .**   | **. . .**        | **. . .**   | **. . .**           | **. . .**    |
+-------------+-------------+------------------+-------------+---------------------+--------------+

To get a more detailed description for a module of interest, type:

``oc module info <annotator name>``

When you identify an annotator in the list above that you wish to use,
install it with the command:

``oc module install <annotator name>``

For example: ``oc module install clinvar``

Only those annotators that are useful for your study need to be
installed. Many annotators include large reference data sets, which will
take time to install and may require substantial disk space. A progress
bar will indicate the portion of the data which has been downloaded as
it runs.

Updating Annotators
-------------------

Update all modules with ``oc module update``. To update specific modules
use ``oc module update [module1] [module2]`` As mentioned above, the
``oc module ls -a`` command will indicate if the version of a module
installed locally is out of date.

Moving Modules Directory
------------------------

The OpenCRAVAT pip package will normally be installed in your local
Python site-packages directory. All of the additional annotators and
other CRAVAT modules will be installed in the 'modules' directory of the
OpenCRAVAT package. By default, this will be in the CRAVAT package in
the site-packages directory. Occasionally the size of the module
reference data is an issue on the drive where the Python site-packages
are stored. If this is the case, you can relocate the CRAVAT modules
directory to a different drive.

Use ``oc config md`` to see where modules are currently stored. To
change the modules directory, copy data from the old modules directory
to the new one, then use ``oc config md [new directory]`` to point
OpencRAVAT to the new directory.

Installing Viewer Widgets
-------------------------

When OpenCRAVAT analysis is complete, one method of exploring the
results is to use the graphical interactive results viewer **oc gui**.
The oc gui program needs visualization widgets related to the annotators
used in the CRAVAT analysis. In the future the viewer will be augmented
to dynamically obtain all required viewer widgets. In the interim, if
you plan to use the ``oc gui`` program to explore results, you need to
install the appropriate viewer widgets. The base widgets for each
annotator have a name that matches the annotator name with a 'wg'
prefix. For example the cosmic annotator results are displayed with the
wgcosmic viewer widget. To see available widgets:

``oc module ls -a -t webviewerwidget``

To install a widget:

``oc module install widgetName``

Multiuser GUI support
---------------------

OpenCRAVAT's web interface can have multiple user accounts by installing
`open-cravat-multiuser <https://github.com/KarchinLab/open-cravat/wiki/Multiuser-support>`__
package (from OpenCRAVAT 1.6.0). See `this
page <https://github.com/KarchinLab/open-cravat/wiki/Multiuser-support>`__
for the details of using multiple user accounts with OpenCRAVAT.
