==================
Command line usage
==================

To analyze a file of variants, just type:

``oc run input.vcf -l hg38``

See the `input format specifications <Running-OpenCRAVAT>`__ for
supported input file formats.

The above command will run all installed annotators on the provided
input file and produce Excel and sqlite output in same directory as the
input file. The terminal output will look something like this:

.. code:: txt

    Running converter...
        Converter (converter)           finished in 0.441s
    Running gene mapper...
        UCSC hg38 Gene Mapper (hg38)    finished in 0.188s
    Running annotators...
            biogrid: started at Thu Jun  6 18:30:03 2019
            biogrid: finished at Thu Jun  6 18:30:03 2019
            biogrid: runtime 0.013s
        annotator(s) finished in 0.128s
    Running aggregator...
        Variants                        finished in 0.013s
        Genes                           finished in 0.010s
        Samples                         finished in 0.008s
        Tags                            finished in 0.018s
    Running post-aggregators...
        Tag Sampler (tagsampler)        finished in 0.005s
        VCF Info (vcfinfo)              finished in 0.006s
    Finished normally. Runtime: 1.239s

To run a subset of the annotators that are installed, use the -a option:

``oc run ./input.vcf -l hg38 -a cosmic ndex``

This command would run just the 2 specified annotators (they be
installed)

If you would like tab delimited output use ``-t text`` or
``-t text excel`` for both.

``oc run ./input.vcf -l hg38 -t text``

The following optional parameters can be included on the OpenCRAVAT
command line AFTER the input file.
``oc run ./input.vcf [command line options]``

+-----------+------------------------------------+
| Option    | Description                        |
+===========+====================================+
| -h        | Shows help message.                |
+-----------+------------------------------------+
| -a        | Annotators to run. List of         |
| <annotato | annotator names separated by       |
| rs>       | spaces.                            |
+-----------+------------------------------------+
| -e        | Run all installed annotators       |
| <annotato | except those listed. List of       |
| rs>       | annotator names separated by       |
|           | spaces.                            |
+-----------+------------------------------------+
| -n        | Output filename prefix. Default is |
| <prefix>  | the input file name.               |
+-----------+------------------------------------+
| -d        | Directory for output files.        |
| <director | Default is the directory of the    |
| y>        | input file.                        |
+-----------+------------------------------------+
| -c        | Path to custom config file, to     |
| <config>  | override cravat.yml settings.      |
+-----------+------------------------------------+
| -v        | Returns verbose output.            |
+-----------+------------------------------------+
| -t        | excel,text - Reporters to run.     |
| <format>  |                                    |
+-----------+------------------------------------+
| -l        | hg38,hg19,hg18 - Reference genome  |
| <genome>  | of input. Default is hg38.         |
+-----------+------------------------------------+
| -x        | Force rebuild of the existing      |
|           | result database.                   |
+-----------+------------------------------------+

To see all supported command line options type:

``oc run -h``

Submitting Multiple Files
-------------------------

As of version 1.4.2, openCRAVAT supports the submission of multiple
input files in one job. In the command line, this can be done by
including multiple paths in the positional arguments as so
``cravat a.vcf b.vcf c.vcf ...``. OpenCRAVAT will merge the variants
found in the input files and process each unique variant once. All input
formats accepted by openCRAVAT can be submitted in multiple files.
However, all files must be the in the same format.

Sample IDs are altered when multiple files are submitted to track which
file(s) variants occurred in. The format will be
``inputFileName_originalSampleID``. For example, assume two files are
submitted, ``jane.vcf`` and ``john.vcf``. Each file contains two
identically named samples, ``normal`` and ``tumor``. In the results,
there will be four sample IDs: ``jane_normal``, ``jane_tumor``,
``john_normal``, and ``john_tumor``.

Working with modules
====================

The ``oc module`` command tree is used to find modules, and change which
are installed on your local system.

+----------------+-----------------------------+-------------------+
| Option         | Description                 | Type              |
+================+=============================+===================+
| -h, --help     | Shows help message.         | Information       |
+----------------+-----------------------------+-------------------+
| ls             | lists modules.              | Information       |
+----------------+-----------------------------+-------------------+
| install        | installs modules.           | System settings   |
+----------------+-----------------------------+-------------------+
| update         | updates modules.            | System settings   |
+----------------+-----------------------------+-------------------+
| uninstall      | uninstalls modules.         | System settings   |
+----------------+-----------------------------+-------------------+
| info           | shows module information.   | Information       |
+----------------+-----------------------------+-------------------+
| install-base   | installs base modules.      | System settings   |
+----------------+-----------------------------+-------------------+

For additional help on a specific command, add -h to the command:
``oc module [command] -h``

See available annotators with: ``oc module ls -a -t annotator``

Get a more detailed description for a module of interest, type:
``oc module info [annotator]``

Install an annotator: ``oc module install [annotator]``

See where modules are currently stored: ``oc config md``

Change the modules directory: ``oc config md [dirPath]``

Working with completed jobs
===========================

Creating a report
-----------------

Create a new report with the ``oc report`` command. The report will
overwrite an existing report of the same type.

::

    oc report job.sqlite -t tsv vcf

The ``-t`` flag is required to select the reporter(s) to run. Find more
reporters with ``oc module ls -a -t reporter``.

Adding annotators
-----------------

It is possible to add annotators to a completed job. Simply pass the
job's sqlite db as the input file to ``oc run``, and include a list of
annotators to add.

::

    oc run job.sqlite -a chasmplus vest

The selected annotators will be added to the job. Note that a new report
will not be generated. That must be done manually if desired.

Upgrading a database
--------------------

In rare cases, an older database will not be able to use features in
newer versions of OpenCRAVAT. If you are getting errors when using newer
features, use ``oc util update-result`` to modify the database to work
with the latest installed version of OpenCRAVAT

Send command line job to the graphical interface
------------------------------------------------

Jobs that are run on the command line will not automatically appear in
the graphical interface. Add an existing OpenCRAVAT job to the jobs
table in the interactive interface with the following command:

::

    oc send-gui test.sqlite


Command line manual 
-------------------


The root command ``oc`` is used in combination with several keywords to
run OpenCRAVAT on the terminal.

+------------+------------------------------------------+
| Option     | Description                              |
+============+==========================================+
| -h         | Shows help message.                      |
+------------+------------------------------------------+
| run        | Run a job                                |
+------------+------------------------------------------+
| report     | Generate a report from a job             |
+------------+------------------------------------------+
| gui        | Start the GUI                            |
+------------+------------------------------------------+
| module     | Change installed modules                 |
+------------+------------------------------------------+
| config     | View and change configuration settings   |
+------------+------------------------------------------+
| new        | Create new modules                       |
+------------+------------------------------------------+
| store      | Publish modules to the store             |
+------------+------------------------------------------+
| util       | Utilities                                |
+------------+------------------------------------------+
| version    | Show version                             |
+------------+------------------------------------------+
| feedback   | Send feedback to the developers          |
+------------+------------------------------------------+

oc run \| Run a job
===================

Positional argument: input - Input file(s). One or more variant files in
a supported format.

Optional arguments: \|Option\|Description\|
\|--------\|---------------------------------\| \| -h, --help \| show
this help message and exit\| \| -a ANNOTATORS [ANNOTATORS ...]. \|
annotators to run\| \| -e EXCLUDES [EXCLUDES ...] \| annotators to
exclude\| \| -n RUN\_NAME \| name of cravat run\| \| -d OUTPUT\_DIR \|
directory for output files\| \| --startat [STAGE] \| starts at given
stage {converter,mapper,annotator,aggregator,postaggregator,reporter}\|
\| --repeat [STAGE] \| forces re-running of given stage if it is in the
run chain.
{converter,mapper,annotator,aggregator,postaggregator,reporter}\| \|
--endat [STARGE] \| ends after given
stage.{converter,mapper,annotator,aggregator,postaggregator,reporter}\|
--skip [STAGE] \| Skips given stage(s).
{converter,mapper,annotator,aggregator,postaggregator,reporter}\| \| -c
CONF \| path to a conf file\| \| --cs CONFS \| configuration string\| \|
-v \| verbose\| \| -t {excel,tsv,vcf,text,csv} \|
[{excel,tsv,vcf,text,csv} ...] report types. If omitted, default one in
cravat.yml is used.\| \| -l {hg38,hg19,hg18} \| reference genome of
input. CRAVAT will lift over to hg38 if needed.\| \| -x \| deletes the
existing result database and creates a new one.\| \| --newlog \| deletes
the existing log file and creates a new one.\| \| --note NOTE \| note
will be written to the run status file \| \| --mp MP \| number of
processes to use to run annotators \| \| -i {cravat,vcf,oldcravat}, \|
--input-format {cravat,vcf,oldcravat} Force input format\| \|
--temp-files \| Leave temporary files after run is complete.\| \|
--writeadmindb \| Write job information to admin db after job
completion\| \| --jobid JOBID \| Job ID for server version\| \|
--version \| Shows open-cravat version.\| \| --separatesample \|
Separate variant results by sample\|

report \| Generate a report from a job
======================================

oc report is used to generate output reports

Positional argument: dbpath - Path to aggregator output

Optional arguments: \|Option\|Description\|
\|--------\|---------------------------------\| \| -h, --help \| show
this help message and exit\| \| -t [FORMAT] \| report types,
{excel,csv,tsv,text,vcf}\| \| -f FILTERPATH \| Path to filter file\| \|
-F FILTERNAME \| Name of filter (stored in aggregator output)\| \| -s
SAVEPATH \| Path to save file\| \| -c CONFPATH \| path to a conf file\|
\| --module-name MODULE\_NAME \| report module name\| \|
--nogenelevelonvariantlevel \| Use this option to prevent gene level
result from being added to variant level result.\| \| --confs CONFS \|
Configuration string\| \| --inputfiles INPUTFILES [INPUTFILES ...] \|
Original input file path\| \| --separatesample \| Write each
variant-sample pair on a separate line\| \| -d OUTPUT\_DIR \| directory
for output files\|

gui \| Start the GUI
====================

Positional argument: result - Path to a CRAVAT result SQLite file

Optional arguments: \|Option\|Description\|
\|--------\|---------------------------------\| \| -h, --help show this
help message and exit\| \| --multiuser \| Runs in multiuser mode\| \|
--headless \| do not open the cravat web page\| \| --http-only \| Force
not to accept https connection\| \| --debug \| Console echoes exceptions
written to log file\|

module \| Change installed modules
==================================

View, install, inspect, and uninstall modules

Commands: \|Command\|Description\|
\|--------\|---------------------------------\| \| ls \| List modules\|
\| install \| Install modules\| \| uninstall \| Uninstall modules\| \|
update \| Update modules\| \| info \| Module details\| \| install-base
\| Install base modules\|

config \| Configuration settings
================================

View and change configuration settings

Commands: \|Command\|Description\|
\|--------\|---------------------------------\| \| md \| Change modules
directory\| \| system \| Show system config\| \| cravat \| Show cravat
config\|

new \| Create new modules
=========================

Create new annotator, and generate an example input file.

Commands: \|Command\|Description\|
\|--------\|---------------------------------\| \| example-input \| Make
example input file\| \| annotator \| Create new annotator\|

store \| Publish modules to the store
=====================================

Publish modules to the store

Commands: \|Command\|Description\|
\|--------\|---------------------------------\| \|publish\|Publish a
module\| \|new-account\|Create an account\| \|change-pw\|Change
password\| \|reset-pw\|Request password reset\| \|verify-email\|Request
email verification\| \|check-login\|Check login credentials\|

util \| Utilities
=================

Utilities to test modules, update results databases, and send command
line jobs to the GUI.

Commands: \|Command\|Description\|
\|--------\|---------------------------------\| \| test\| Test installed
modules\| \| update-result\| Update old result database to newer
format\| \| send-gui\| Copy a command line job into the GUI submission
list\|

version \| Show version
=======================

``oc version`` displays the currently installed version of OpenCRAVAT

feedback \| Send feedback to the developers
===========================================

``oc feedback`` opens the GitHub issues tracker at
https://github.com/KarchinLab/open-cravat/issues.

1.7.0 Command Deprecation
=========================

OpenCRAVAT 1.7.0 introduced a single command tree, ``oc``, which
centralizes functions that previously were spread across possible
through multiple command line tools: ``cravat``, ``wcravat``,
``cravat-admin``, ``cravat-report``, ``cravat-test``, and
``cravat-util``. The table below maps old commands to the ``oc`` tree.
Users are encouraged to shift to using ``oc``. Old root commands will be
deprecated in a later version.

+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
| Old Program     | Command              | New Command              |
+=================+======================+==========================+
| cravat          |                      | oc run                   |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
| wcravat         |                      | oc gui                   |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
| cravat-view     |                      | oc gui job.sqlite        |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
| cravat-report   |                      | oc report                |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
| cravat-admin    | md                   | oc config md             |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
|                 | install-base         | oc module install-base   |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
|                 | install              | oc module install        |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
|                 | update               | oc module update         |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
|                 | uninstall            | oc module uninstall      |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
|                 | info                 | oc module info           |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
|                 | publish              | oc store publish         |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
|                 | create-account       | oc store new-account     |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
|                 | reset-password       | oc store reset-pw        |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
|                 | verify-email         | oc store verify-email    |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
|                 | check-login          | oc store check-login     |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
|                 | make-example-input   | oc new example-input     |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
|                 | new-annotator        | oc new annotator         |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
|                 | report-issue         | oc feedback              |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
|                 | show-system-conf     | oc config system         |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
|                 | show-cravat-conf     | oc config cravat         |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
|                 | version              | oc version               |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
| cravat-test     |                      | oc util test             |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+
| cravat-util     |                      | migrate-result           |
+-----------------+----------------------+--------------------------+

