==========
GUI usage
==========

The web interface is started by running a local web server, then
connecting it using a browser. Both these actions can be taken by
running the following command in any command shell.

::

    oc gui

This will start a python server in the shell it was run in. Closing the
command line shell will shutdown the server.

Submitting Jobs
===============

The submit page is divided into two sections. Jobs are submitted using
the form on the left. Running and finished jobs can be viewed in the
table on the right.

.. figure:: figures/Submission_screen2.png
   :alt: 

To submit a job, either upload a file, or input text which matches a
supported file format. Then, use the checkboxes below to select
annotators, and which types of reports to run. If you are submiting
variants in an assembly other than hg38, be sure to select the correct
assembly at the top. When you have selected the right options, click the
annotate button to submit the job.

After submission, a new row should appear at the top of the jobs table.
The status column should say "Submitted". As the job runs, you can click
the refresh button to view the current status of all submitted jobs.

When a job is finished, launch the interactive web viewer in a new tab
by clicking the "Open Result Viewer" button, or download different types
of reports using the buttons in the "Download" column. If a report
download button is red, that is because the report has not been
generated yet. Click on the button to generate the report, then
periodically refresh the table until it is finished.

Uploading multiple files
------------------------

OpenCRAVAT can process more than one input file per job. Input files
must be in the same format. The variants in each input file will be
merged and each unique variant will be processed once.

To submit multiple files, click the upload file button as usual. Once
the file select dialog box opens, hold down the Ctrl key (Command on
mac) and select multiple files. Contiguous groups of files can be
selected by holding down the Shift key and clicking on the first and
last file in the group. When multiple files are selected, a list of
selected files will appear below the file select button.

When multiple files are run, OpenCRAVAT will merge filenames and sample
ids to track the source(s) of each variant. `See
here <https://github.com/KarchinLab/open-cravat/wiki/Running-OpenCRAVAT>`__
for a description of this process.

Managing Modules
================

The store tab of the OpenCRAVAT web interface contains controls for
managing which modules are installed to OpenCRAVAT. By default, it will
launch into a view of all available annotators in the OpenCRAVAT store.

.. figure:: figures/store_screenshot2.png
   :alt: 

Clicking on one of the panels will open up a detail panel for that
module.

.. figure:: figures/ClinVar_screenshot2.png
   :alt: 

The detail panel has documentation and attribution information submitted
by the developer of the module.

The "Install" button on the top right will install that module. Once
clicked, the panel can be closed. The install will proceed in the
background. Multiple installations can be queued, and will be processed
in the order they were clicked. Modules will not install simultaneously.
You can see install status at the top of each modules panel in the
module overview, or in the top right of a module's detail panel.

Modules can be deleted, or updated, in a similar way. The "Install"
button will automatically change based on the install status of the
module.

Using optional file converters: 23andMe and Ancestry
====================================================

To submit an annotation job using an optional reporter-supported file
via the OpenCRAVAT graphical interface: 1) Download and unzip the txt
file provided by 23andMe or Ancestry. 2) Navigate to the Jobs tab of
OpenCRAVAT. 3) In the Variants section, click the "Choose a file" button
and use the file selector to select the unzipped txt file. 4) At the top
of the Variants section, select the genome version hg19. 5) Select
annotations from the Annotations section. 6) Submit the job by clicking
the large orange "Annotate" button on the lower left.

Stopping the web interface
==========================

On the terminal where you ran ``oc gui``, press Ctrl-c. On some
operating systems, Ctrl-c may not be well implemented. In that case,
press Ctrl-break. If your computer does not have a break key, usually
there is a key combination that produces the effect of a break key.
Examples of alternative key combinations for ctrl-break are:
Ctrl+Fn+Esc, Ctrl+Fn+B, Ctrl+Fn+F11, Ctrl+Fn+Shift.

System setting
==============

System setting icon is the triple-bar icon at the top right corner of
the main page of OpenCRAVAT web interface.

.. figure:: figures/system_setting_1.png
   :alt: 

Clicking this icon will open the system setting dialog.

.. figure:: figures/system_setting_2.png
   :alt: 

The path to the system configuration file cannot be changed on this
dialog. The location of the root jobs directory and that of the modules
directory can be entered manually. If your browser supports
autocompletion from history, your previous setting values for these
locations will show as options, also.

``Warn if number of input lines is more than`` sets the number of input
lines which will trigger a warning popup before submitting a job. This
is to prevent accidentally loading the server with an unusually big job.

The maximum number of concurrently running jobs at each time can be
changed at ``Maximum number of concurrent jobs``.

The maximum number of concurrently running annotators per each job can
be changed at ``Maximum number of concurrent annotations per job``.

These two maximum numbers can affect the performance of your OpenCRAVAT
server. The maximum number of processes which can be spawned by the
server is the maximum number of concurrent jobs times the maximum number
of concurrent annotators per job. So, calibration may be needed for
these two values for optimal performance of your OpenCRAVAT server.

Click ``Save`` button to save the setting and exit the dialog, or click
``Reset`` to reset the setting values to what they were when the
settings dialog opened.

Changing domain name and port
=============================

The default domain name and port of OpenCRAVAT server are ``localhost``
(or ``0.0.0.0``) and 8060, respectively. If you want to use a different
domain name (for example, a public domain name) and a different port
number, change ``cravat.yml`` file in the OpenCRAVAT configuration
folder (to know where your OpenCRAVAT configuration folder is, enter the
below command on the command-line terminal and see the value for
``conf_dir``).

``oc config system``

In ``cravat.yml``, enter the new domain name under ``gui_host`` and the
new port number under ``gui_port``. An example ``cravat.yml`` with these
changes is below:

::

    converter: converter
    genemapper: hg38
    aggregator: aggregator
    reporter: excelreporter
    gui_host: www.opencravat.com
    gui_port: 80

HTTPS support
=============

OpenCRAVAT supports HTTPS connection on its own. To enable HTTPS for
OpenCRAVAT web interface, create a certificate file in `PEM
format <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Privacy-Enhanced_Mail>`__ for your
OpenCRAVAT web interface domain, name the certificate file as
``cert.pem``, and put it in the OpenCRAVAT configuration folder. To know
where your OpenCRAVAT configuration folder is, run the following command
on the command line terminal of your OS:

::

    oc config system

``conf_dir`` is the OpenCRAVAT configuration folder.
